
HYDRAULIC PUMPS 
 These are mainly classified into two categories: A.
Non-positive displacement pumps B.
Positive displacement pumps.
 A.
Non-Positive Displacement Pumps
 These  pumps  are  also  known  as  hydro-dynamic  pumps.  In  these  pumps  the  fluid  is pressurized  by the  rotation  of  the  propeller  and  the  fluid  pressure  is  proportional  to the rotor  speed.  These  pumps  can  not  withstanding  high  pressures  and  generally  used  for low-pressure and  high-volume flow applications. The fluid pressure  and  flow  generated due to inertia effect of the fluid. The fluid motion is generated due to rotating propeller.
These pumps provide a smooth and continuous flow but the flow output decreases with increase in system resistance (load). The flow output decreases because some of the fluid slip back at higher resistance. The fluid flow is completely stopped at very large system resistance and thus the volumetric efficiency will become zero. Therefore, the flow rate not  only  depends  on  the  rotational  speed  but  also  on  the  resistance  provided  by  the system.  The  important  advantages  of  non-positive  displacement  pumps  are  lower  initial cost,  less  operating  maintenance  because  of  less  moving  parts,  simplicity  of  operation, higher reliability and suitability with wide range of fluid etc. These pumps are primarily used for transporting fluids and find little use in the hydraulic or fluid power industries.
Centrifugal pump is the  common example of non-positive displacement  pumps.
 B.
Positive displacement pump
 These  pumps  deliver  a  constant  volume  of  fluid  in  a  cycle.  The  discharge  quantity  per revolution  is  fixed  in  these  pumps  and  they  produce  fluid  flow  proportional  to  their displacement and rotor speed. These pumps are used in most of the industrial fluid power applications. The output fluid flow is constant and is independent of the system pressure (load).  The  important  advantage  associated  with  these  pumps  is  that  the  high-pressure and low-pressure areas (means input and output region) are separated and hence the fluid cannot leak back due to higher pressure at the outlets. These features make the positive displacement  pump  most  suited  and  universally  accepted  for  hydraulic  systems.  The important  advantages  of  positive  displacement  pumps  over  non-positive  displacement pumps  include  capability  to  generate  high  pressures,  high  volumetric  efficiency,  high power  to  weight  ratio,  change  in  efficiency  throughout  the  pressure  range  is  small  and wider operating range pressure and speed. The fluid flow rate of these pumps ranges from 0.1 and 15,000 gpm, the pressure head ranges between 10 and 100,000 psi and specific speed is less than 500.
It is important to note that the positive displacement pumps do not produce pressure but they only produce fluid flow. The resistance to output fluid flow generates the pressure. It means that if the discharge port (output) of a positive displacement pump is opened to the atmosphere,  then  fluid  flow  will  not  generate  any  output  pressure  above  atmospheric pressure. But, if the discharge port is partially blocked, then the pressure will rise due to the  increase  in  fluid  flow  resistance.  If  the  discharge  port  of  the  pump  is  completely blocked, then an infinite resistance will be generated. This will result in the breakage of the  weakest  component  in  the  circuit.  Therefore,  the  safety  valves  are  provided  in  the hydraulic  circuits  along  with  positive  displacement  pumps.  Important  positive displacement pumps are gears pumps, vane pumps and piston pumps. The details of these pumps are discussed in the following sections.
 Gear pump is a robust and simple positive displacement pump. It has two meshed gears revolving about their respective axes. These gears are the only moving parts in the pump.
They are compact, relatively inexpensive and have few moving parts. The rigid design of the gears and houses allow for very high pressures and the ability to pump highly viscous fluids.  They are  suitable  for  a  wide  range  of  fluids  and  offer  self-priming performance.
Sometimes gear pumps are designed to function as either a motor or a pump. These pump includes  helical  and  herringbone  gear  sets  (instead  of  spur  gears),  lobe  shaped  rotors similar to Roots blowers (commonly used as superchargers), and mechanical designs that allow the stacking of pumps. Based upon the design, the gear pumps are classified as: External gear pumps Lobe pumps Internal gear pumps Gerotor pumps Generally gear pumps are used to pump: Petrochemicals: Pure or filled bitumen, pitch, diesel oil, crude oil, lube oil etc.
Chemicals: Sodium silicate, acids, plastics, mixed chemicals, isocyanates etc.
Paint and ink Resins and adhesives Pulp and paper: acid, soap, lye, black liquor, kaolin, lime, latex, sludge etc.
Food:  Chocolate,  cacao  butter,  fillers,  sugar,  vegetable  fats  and  oils,  molasses, animal food etc.
 The external gear pump consists of externally meshed two gears housed in a pump case as  shown  in  figure  1.  One  of  the  gears  is  coupled  with  a  prime  mover  and  is  called  as driving gear and another is called as driven gear. The rotating gear carries the fluid from the tank to the outlet pipe. The suction side is towards the portion whereas the gear teeth come out of the mesh. When the gears rotate, volume of the chamber expands leading to pressure drop below atmospheric value. Therefore the vacuum is created and the fluid is pushed into the void due to atmospheric pressure. The fluid is trapped between housing and rotating teeth of the gears. The discharge side of pump is towards the portion where the gear  teeth  run  into  the  mesh  and  the volume  decreases  between  meshing teeth.  The pump  has  a  positive  internal  seal  against  leakage;  therefore,  the  fluid  is  forced  into  the outlet  port.  The  gear  pumps  are  often  equipped  with  the  side  wear  plate  to  avoid  the leakage. The clearance between gear teeth and housing and between side plate and gear face is very important and plays an important role in preventing leakage. In general, the gap distance is less than 10 micrometers. The amount of fluid discharge is determined by the number of gear teeth, the volume of fluid between each pair of teeth and the speed of rotation. The important drawback of external gear pump is the unbalanced side load on its bearings. It is caused due to high pressure at the outlet and low pressure at the inlet which results  in  slower  speeds  and  lower  pressure  ratings  in  addition  to  reducing  the  bearing life. Gear pumps are most commonly used for the hydraulic fluid power applications and are widely used in chemical installations to pump fluid with a certain viscosity.
 Figure 1 Gear pump
 Figure 2 Lobe pump
 Lobe  pumps  work  on  the  similar  principle  of  working  as  that  of  external  gear  pumps.
However in Lobe pumps, the lobes do not make any contact like external gear pump (see Figure  2).  Lobe  contact  is  prevented  by  external  timing  gears  located  in  the  gearbox.
Similar  to  the  external  gear  pump,  the  lobes  rotate  to  create  expanding  volume  at  the inlet.  Now,  the  fluid  flows  into  the  cavity  and  is  trapped  by  the  lobes.  Fluid  travels around the interior of casing in the pockets between the lobes and the casing. Finally, the meshing of the lobes forces liquid to pass through the outlet port. The bearings are placed out  of  the  pumped  liquid.  Therefore  the  pressure  is  limited  by the  bearing  location  and shaft deflection.
Because of superb sanitary qualities, high efficiency, reliability, corrosion resistance and good clean-in-place and steam-in-place (CIP/SIP) characteristics, Lobe pumps are widely used in industries such as pulp and paper, chemical, food, beverage, pharmaceutical and biotechnology  etc.  These  pumps  can  handle  solids  (e.g.,  cherries  and  olives),  slurries, pastes, and a variety of liquids. A gentle pumping action minimizes product degradation.
They  also  offer  continuous  and  intermittent  reversible  flows.  Flow  is  relatively independent  of  changes  in  process  pressure  and  therefore,  the  output  is  constant  and continuous.
Lobe pumps are frequently used in food applications because they handle solids without damaging  the  product.  Large  sized  particles  can  be  pumped  much  effectively  than  in other positive displacement types. As the lobes do not make any direct contact therefore, the clearance is not as close as in other Positive displacement pumps. This specific design of  pump  makes  it  suitable  to  handle  low  viscosity fluids  with  diminished  performance.
Loading characteristics are not as good as other designs, and suction ability is low. High- viscosity  liquids  require  reduced  speeds  to  achieve  satisfactory  performance.  The reduction in speed can be 25% or more in case of high viscosity fluid.
 Figure 3 Internal gear pump
 Internal  gear pumps are exceptionally versatile. They are often used for low or medium viscosity fluids such as solvents and fuel oil and wide range of temperature. This is non- pulsing, self-priming and can run dry for short periods. It is a variation of the basic gear pump.
It  comprises  of  an  internal  gear,  a  regular  spur  gear,  a  crescent-shaped  seal  and  an external  housing.  The  schematic  of  internal  gear  pump  is  shown  in  figure  3.  Liquid enters  the  suction  port  between  the  rotor  (large  exterior  gear)  and  idler  (small  interior gear)  teeth.  Liquid  travels  through  the  pump  between  the  teeth  and  crescent.  Crescent divides the liquid and  acts as a seal between  the  suction and discharge ports. When the teeth  mesh  on  the  side  opposite  to  the  crescent  seal,  the  fluid  is  forced  out  through  the
 discharge  port  of  the  pump.  This  clearance  between  gears  can  be
 adjusted  to accommodate high temperature, to handle high viscosity fluids and to accommodate the wear.  These  pumps  are  bi-rotational  so  that  they  can  be  used  to  load  and  unload  the vessels. As these pumps have only two moving parts and one stuffing box, therefore they are  reliable,  simple  to  operate  and  easy  to  maintain.  However,  these  pumps  are  not suitable  for  high  speed  and  high  pressure  applications.  Only one  bearing  is  used  in  the pump therefore overhung load on shaft bearing reduces the life of the bearing.
 Applications
 Some common internal gear pump applications are: All varieties of fuel oil and lube oil Resins and Polymers Alcohols and solvents Asphalt, Bitumen, and Tar Polyurethane foam (Isocyanate and polyol) Food products such as corn syrup, chocolate, and peanut butter Paint, inks, and pigments Soaps and surfactants Glycol
 Figure 4  Gerotor pump
 Gerotor is a positive displacement pump. The name Gerotor is derived from "Generated Rotor". At the most basic level, a Gerotor is essentially one that is moved via fluid power.
Originally  this  fluid  was  water;  today  the  wider  use  is  in  hydraulic  devices.  The schematic  of  Gerotor  pump  is  shown  in  figure  4.  Gerotor  pump  is  an  internal  gear pump without the crescent. It consists of two rotors viz. inner and outer rotor. The inner rotor has N teeth, and the outer rotor has N+1 teeth. The inner rotor is located off-center and  both  rotors  rotate.  The  geometry  of  the  two  rotors  partitions  the  volume  between them  into  N  different  dynamically-changing  volumes.  During  the  rotation,  volume  of each  partition  changes  continuously.  Therefore,  any  given  volume  first  increases,  and then decreases. An increase in volume creates vacuum. This vacuum creates suction, and thus, this part of the cycle sucks the fluid. As the volume decreases, compression occurs.
During  this  compression  period,  fluids  can  be  pumped,  or  compressed  (if  they  are gaseous fluids).
The close  tolerance  between  the  gears  acts  as  a  seal  between  the  suction  and  discharge ports. Rotor and idler teeth mesh completely to form a seal equidistant from the discharge and suction ports. This seal forces the liquid out of the discharge port. The flow output is uniform and constant at the outlets.
The important  advantages  of the pumps are high  speed  operation,  constant  discharge  in all pressure conditions, bidirectional operation, less sound in running condition and less maintenance due to only two moving parts and one stuffing box etc. However, the pump is having some limitations such as medium pressure operating range, clearance is fixed, solids can’t be pumped and overhung load on the shaft bearing etc.
 Applications
 Gerotors are widely used in industries and are produced in variety of shapes and sizes by a  number  of  different  methods.  These  pumps  are  primarily  suitable  for  low  pressure applications  such  as  lubrication  systems  or  hot  oil  filtration  systems,  but  can  also  be found in low to moderate pressure hydraulic applications. However common applications are as follows: Light fuel oils Lube oil Cooking oils Hydraulic fluid
 In  the  previous  lecture  we  have  studied  the  gear  pumps.  These  pumps  have  a disadvantage of small leakage due to gap between gear teeth and the pump housing. This limitation  is  overcome  in  vane  pumps.  The  leakage  is  reduced  by  using  spring  or hydraulically  loaded  vanes  placed  in  the  slots  of  driven  rotor.  Capacity  and  pressure ratings  of  a  vane  pump  are  generally  lower  than  the  gear  pumps,  but  reduced  leakage gives an improved volumetric efficiency of around 95%.
Vane  pumps  are  available  in  a  number  of  vane  configurations  including  sliding  vane, flexible vane, swinging vane, rolling vane, and external vane etc. Each type of vane pump has  its  own  advantages.  For  example,  external  vane  pumps  can  handle  large  solids.
Flexible vane pumps  can  handle only the small  solids  but create  good vacuum.  Sliding vane pumps can run dry for short periods of time and can handle small amounts of vapor.
The vane pumps are known for their dry priming, ease of maintenance, and good suction characteristics. The operating range of these pumps varies from -32 °C to 260 °C.
 Figure 5. Schematic of working principle of vane pump
 The  schematic  of  vane  pump  working  principle  is  shown  in  figure  5.  Vane  pumps generate a pumping action by tracking of vanes  along the casing wall. The vane pumps generally consist of a rotor, vanes, ring and a port plate with inlet and outlet ports. The rotor  in  a  vane  pump  is  connected  to  the  prime  mover  through  a  shaft.  The  vanes  are located on the slotted rotor. The rotor is eccentrically placed inside a cam ring as shown in the figure. The rotor is sealed into the cam by two side plates. When the prime mover rotates the rotor, the vanes are thrown outward due to centrifugal force. The vanes track along the ring. It provides a tight hydraulic seal to the fluid which is more at the higher rotation speed due to higher centrifugal force. This produces a suction cavity in the ring as the rotor rotates. It creates vacuum at the inlet and therefore, the fluid is pushed into the pump through the inlet. The fluid is carried around to the outlet by the vanes whose retraction  causes  the  fluid  to  be  expelled.  The  capacity  of  the  pump  depends  upon  the eccentricity,  expansion of vanes,  width of vanes  and speed of the rotor.  It can be noted that the fluid flow will not occur when the eccentricity is zero. These pumps can handle thin liquids (low viscosity) at relatively higher pressure. These pumps can be run dry for a  small  duration  without  any  failure.  These  pumps  develop  good  vacuum  due  to negligible  leakage.  However,  these  pumps  are  not  suitable  for  high  speed  applications and  for  the  high  viscosity  fluids  or  fluids  carrying  some  abrasive  particles.  The maintenance  cost  is  also  higher  due  to  many  moving  parts.  These  pumps  have  various applications for the pumping of following fluids: A.
Aerosol and Propellants B.
Aviation Service - Fuel Transfer, Deicing C.
Auto Industry - Fuels, Lubes, Refrigeration Coolants D.
Bulk Transfer of LPG and NH3 E.
LPG Cylinder Filling F.
Alcohols G.
Refrigeration - Freons, Ammonia H.
Solvents I.
Aqueous solutions
 Figure 6.  Unbalanced vane pump
 In practice, the vane pumps have more than one vane as shown in figure 6. The rotor is offset  within  the  housing,  and  the  vanes  are  constrained  by  a  cam  ring  as  they  cross inlet  and  outlet  ports.  Although  the  vane  tips  are  held  against  the  housing,  still  a  small amount of leakage exists between rotor faces and body sides. Also, the vanes compensate to a large degree for wear at the vane tips or in the housing itself. The pressure difference between  outlet  and  inlet  ports  creates  a  large  amount  of  load  on  the  vanes  and  a significant amount of side load on the rotor shaft which can lead to bearing failure. This type of pump is called as unbalanced vane pump.
 3.2Balanced vane pump
 Figure  7.  shows  the  schematic  of  a  balanced  vane  pump.  This  pump  has  an  elliptical cam ring with two inlet and two outlet ports. Pressure loading still occurs in the vanes but the two identical pump halves create equal but opposite forces on the rotor. It leads to the zero  net  force  on  the  shaft  and  bearings.  Thus,  lives  of  pump  and  bearing  increase significantly. Also the sounds and vibrations decrease in the running mode of the pump.
 Figure 7. Balanced Vane Pump
 The  proper  design  of  pump  is  important  and  a  challenging  task.  In  ideal  condition,  the capacity  of  a  pump  should  be  exactly  same  to  load  requirements.  A  pump  with  larger capacity wastes energy as the excess fluid will pass through the pressure  relief valve. It also  leads  to  a rise in  fluid  temperature due to energy conversion to  the heat  instead  of useful  work  and  therefore  it  needs  some  external  cooling  arrangement.  Therefore,  the higher capacity pump increases the power consumption and makes the system bulky and costly. Pumps are generally available with certain standard capacities and the user has to choose  the  next  available  capacity  of  the  pump.  Also,  the  flow  rate  from  the  pump  in most hydraulic applications needs to be varying as per the requirements. Therefore, some vane pumps are also available with adjustable capacity as shown in figure 8. This can be achieved  by  adjusting  a  positional  relationship  between  rotor  and  the  inner  casing  by the help of an external controlling screw. These pumps basically consist of a rotor, vanes, cam ring, port plate, thrust bearing for guiding the cam ring and a discharge control screw by which the position of the cam ring relative to the rotor can be varied. In general, the adjustable vane pumps are unbalanced pump type.
 Figure 8. Adjustable vane pump
 The  amount  of  fluid  that  is  displaced  by  a  vane  pump  running  at  a  constant  speed  is determined by the maximum extension of the vanes and the vanes width. However, for a pump  running  in  operation,  the  width  of  vanes  cannot  be  changed  but  the  distance  by which the vanes are extended can be varied. This  is possible by making a provision for changing  the  position  of  the  cam  ring  (adjustable  inner  casing)  relative  to  the  rotor  as shown in figure 5.3.4. The eccentricity of rotor with respect to the cam ring is adjusted by the  movement  of  the  screw.  The  delivery  volume  increases  with  increase  in  the eccentricity. This kind of arrangement can be used to achieve a variable volume from the pump and is known as variable displacement vane pump.
In  general,  the  adjusted  vane  pumps  are  pressure  compensated.  It  means  that  the discharge is controlled by pre-adjusted value and when the discharge pressure reaches a certain (adjusted) value; the pumping action ceases. This mechanism is accomplished by using a compensating spring to offset the cam ring. Initially, the eccentricity is maximum because the discharge pressure is zero and spring force keeps the cam ring at the extreme right position. As the discharge pressure increases, it acts on the inner contour of the cam ring.  It  pushes  the  cam  ring  towards  the  left  against  the  spring  force  and  hence  the eccentricity  reduces  and  hence  the  discharge  through  the  pump  reduces.  When  the discharge  pressure  becomes  high  enough  to  overcome  the  entire  spring  force;  the compensator  spring  will  compress  until  the  zero  eccentricity  is  achieved.  In  this condition, the pumping action ceases and the fluid flow (except small leakages) does not occur. Therefore, the system pressure can be adjusted by setting the compensator spring.
These  pumps  ensure  their  own  protection  against  excessive system  pressure  and  do  not rely  on  the  safety  control  devices  of  the  hydraulic  system.  These  pumps  are  used  as energy savings  devices  and  have  been  used  in  many applications,  including  automotive transmissions.
 Piston  pumps  are  meant  for  the  high-pressure  applications.  These  pumps  have  high- efficiency  and  simple  design  and  needs  lower  maintenance.  These  pumps  convert  the rotary motion of  the input shaft to the  reciprocating motion of  the piston. These  pumps work similar to the four stroke engines. They work on the principle that a reciprocating piston  draws  fluid  inside  the  cylinder  when  the  piston  retracts  in  a  cylinder  bore  and discharge the fluid when it extends. Generally, these pumps have fixed inclined plate or variable  degree  of  angle  plate  known  as  swash  plate  (shown  in  Figure  9.  and  Figure 10). When the piston barrel assembly rotates, the swash plate in contact with the piston slippers  slides  along  its  surface.  The  stroke  length  (axial  displacement)  depends  on  the
 inclination angle of the swash plate. When the swash plate is vertical,  the reciprocating
 motion does not occur and hence pumping of the fluid does not take place. As the swash plate angle increases, the piston reciprocates inside the cylinder barrel. The stroke length increases with increase in the swash plate angle  and therefore volume of  pumping fluid increases.  During  one  half  of  the  rotation  cycle,  the  pistons  move  out  of  the  cylinder barrel  and  the  volume  of  the  barrel  increases.  During  another  half  of  the  rotation,  the pistons move into the cylinder barrel and the barrel volume decreases. This phenomenon is  responsible  for  drawing  the  fluid  in  and  pumping  it  out.  These  pumps  are  positive displacement  pump  and  can  be  used  for  both  liquids  and  gases.  Piston  pumps  are basically of two types: i.
Axial piston pumps ii.
Radial piston pumps
 Axial piston pumps are positive displacement pumps which converts rotary motion of the input shaft into an axial reciprocating motion of the pistons. These pumps have a number of  pistons  (usually  an  odd  number)  in  a  circular  array  within  a  housing  which  is commonly  referred  to  as  a  cylinder  block,  rotor  or  barrel.  These  pumps  are  used  in  jet aircraft.  They  are  also  used  in  small  earthmoving  plants  such  as  skid  loader  machines.
Another  use  is  to  drive  the  screws  of  torpedoes.  In  general,  these  systems  have  a maximum  operating  temperature  of  about  120  °C.  Therefore,  the  leakage  between cylinder housing and body block is used for cooling and lubrication of the rotating parts.
This  cylinder  block  rotates  by  an  integral  shaft  aligned  with  the  pistons.  These  pumps have sub-types as: a.
Bent axis piston pumps b.
Swash plate axial piston pump
 Figure  5.3.5  shows  the  schematic  of  bent  axis  piston  pump.  In  these  pumps,  the reciprocating action of the pistons is obtained by bending the axis of the cylinder block.
The cylinder block rotates at an angle which is inclined to the drive shaft. The cylinder block is turned by the drive shaft through a universal link. The cylinder block is set at an offset angle with the drive shaft. The cylinder block contains a number of pistons along its  periphery.  These  piston  rods  are  connected  with  the  drive  shaft  flange  by  ball-and- socket joints. These pistons are forced in and out of their bores as the distance between the drive shaft flange and the cylinder block changes. A universal link connects the block to the drive shaft, to provide alignment and a positive drive.
 Figure 9. Bent axis piston pump
 The volumetric displacement (discharge) of the pump is controlled by changing the offset angle.  It makes the system simple and inexpensive. The discharge does  not occur when the cylinder block is parallel to the drive shaft. The offset angle can vary from 0° to 40°.
The fixed displacement units are usually provided with 23° or 30° offset angles while the variable displacement units are provided with a yoke and an external control mechanism to change the offset angle. Some designs have arrangement of moving the yoke over the center position to reverse the fluid flow direction. The flow rate of the pump varies with the offset angle . There is no flow when the cylinder block centerline is parallel to the drive shaft centerline (offset angle is 0°). The total fluid flow per stroke can be given as: The flow rate of the pump can be given as:
 nAD tan
 (5.3.1)
 nADN tan
 here,
 tan
 (5.3.2) (5.3.3) where is  the  piston  stroke, is  piston  diameter, is  the number  of  pistons, is  the speed of pump and is the area of piston.
 A swash plate is a device that translates the rotary motion of a shaft into the reciprocating motion.  It  consists  of  a disk  attached  to  a  shaft as  shown  in  Figure  5.3.6.  If  the  disk  is aligned perpendicular to the shaft; the disk will turn along with the rotating shaft without any reciprocating effect. Similarly, the edge of the inclined shaft will appear to oscillate along the shaft's length. This apparent linear motion increases with increase in the angle between  disk  and  the  shaft  (offset  angle).  The  apparent  linear  motion  can  be  converted into  an  actual  reciprocating  motion  by  means  of  a  follower  that  does  not  turn  with  the swash plate.
 Figure 10. Swash plate piston pump
 In  swash  plate  axial  piston  pump  a  series  of  pistons  are  aligned  coaxially  with  a  shaft through  a  swash  plate  to  pump  a  fluid.  The  schematic  of  swash  plate  piston  pump  is shown in Figure 5.3.6. The axial reciprocating motion of pistons is obtained by a swash plate  that  is  either  fixed  or  has  variable  degree  of  angle.  As  the  piston  barrel  assembly rotates, the piston rotates around the shaft with the piston shoes in contact with the swash plate.  The  piston  shoes  follow  the  angled  surface  of  the  swash  plate  and  the  rotational motion  of the shaft  is  converted  into  the reciprocating motion  of the  pistons.  When  the
 swash pl
 ate is perpendicular to the shaft; the reciprocating motion to the piston does not occur. As the swash plate angle increases, the piston follows the angle of the swash plate surface and hence it moves in and out of the barrel. The piston moves out of the cylinder barrel during one half of  the cycle of rotation thereby generating an increasing volume, while  during  other  half  of  the  rotating  cycle,  the  pistons  move  into  the  cylinder  barrel generating  a  decreasing  volume.  This  reciprocating  motion  of  the  piston  results  in  the drawing in and pumping out of the fluid. Pump capacity can be controlled by varying the swash  plate  angle  with  the  help  of  a  separate  hydraulic  cylinder.  The  pump  capacity (discharge) increases with increase in the swash plate angle and vice-versa. The cylinder block and the drive shaft in this pump are located on the same centerline. The pistons are connected through shoes and a shoe plate that bears against the swash plate. These pumps can be designed to have a variable displacement capability. It can be done by mounting the swash plate in a movable yoke. The swash plate angle can be changed by pivoting the yoke on pintles.
 Figure 11.Radial piston pump
 The typical construction of radial piston pump is shown in Figure 11. The piston pump has pistons aligned radially in a cylindrical block. It consists of a pintle, a cylinder barrel with pistons and a rotor containing a reaction ring. The pintle directs the fluid in and out of the cylinder. Pistons are placed in radial bores around the rotor. The piston shoes ride on  an  eccentric  ring  which  causes  them  to  reciprocate  as  they  rotate.  The  eccentricity determines the stroke of the pumping piston. Each piston is connected to inlet port when it  starts  extending  while  it  is  connected  to  the  outlet  port  when  start  retracting.  This connection to the inlet and outlet port is performed by the timed porting arrangement in
 the pintle. For initiating a pumping action, the reaction ring is moved eccentrically with
 respect to the pintle or shaft axis. As the cylinder barrel rotates, the pistons on one side travel  outward.  This  draws  the  fluid  in  as  the  cylinder  passes  the  suction  port  of  the pintle.  It  is continued  till  the  maximum  eccentricity is  reached.  When  the  piston passes the maximum eccentricity,  pintle is forced inwards by the reaction ring.  This forces the fluid to flow out of the cylinder and enter in the discharge (outlet) port of the pintle.
The radial piston pump works on high pressure (up to 1000 bar). It is possible to use the pump  with  various  hydraulic  fluids  like  mineral  oil,  biodegradable  oil,  HFA  (oil  in water),  HFC  (water-glycol),  HFD  (synthetic  ester)  or  cutting  emulsion.  This  is  because the  parts  are  hydrostatically  balanced.  It  makes  the  pump  suitable  for  the  many applications  such  as  machine  tools  (displace  of  cutting  emulsion,  supply  for  hydraulic equipment like cylinders), high pressure units (overload protection of presses), test rigs, automotive  sector  (automatic  transmission,  hydraulic  suspension  control  in  upper-class cars), plastic (powder injection molding) and wind energy etc.
 In general the applications of Hydraulic Pumps can be summarized as,
 A.
Hydraulic  pumps  are  used  to  transfer  power  via  hydraulic  liquid.  These  pumps have  a  number  of  applications  in  automobiles,  material  handling  systems, automatic transmissions, controllers, compressors and household items.
B.
The hand operated hydraulic pump is used in a hydraulic jack where many strokes of the pump apply hydraulic pressure to lift the ram.
C.
A backhoe uses an engine driven hydraulic pump to drive the articulating parts of D.
The hydraulic pumps are commonly used in the automotive vehicles especially in the mechanical hoe.
power steering systems.
E.
The lift system of tractor is operated by the hydraulic pumps. These are used in automatic transmissions and material handling systems in industries.
F.
Many precise controllers are developed by using hydraulic pumps. The commonly used compressor is operated by reciprocating pumps.
G.
The  hydraulic  pumps  are  also  used  in  routine  household  systems  like  power  lift and air-conditions. Therefore, it can be said that the hydraulic pumps have significant applications in industries as well as ones routine life.
